The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Adventures of Tom Sawyer, Complete by
Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use
it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

Title: The Adventures of Tom Sawyer, Complete

Author: Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)

Release Date: August 20, 2006 [EBook #74]
Last updated: August 17, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOM SAWYER ***

Produced by David Widger





THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER

By Mark Twain

(Samuel Langhorne Clemens)




CONTENTS

CHAPTER I. Y-o-u-u Tom-Aunt Polly Decides Upon her Duty--Tom Practices
Music--The Challenge--A Private Entrance

CHAPTER II. Strong Temptations--Strategic Movements--The Innocents
Beguiled

CHAPTER III. Tom as a General--Triumph and Reward--Dismal
Felicity--Commission and Omission

CHAPTER IV. Mental Acrobatics--Attending Sunday--School--The
Superintendent--ìShowing offî--Tom Lionized

CHAPTER V. A Useful Minister--In Church--The Climax

CHAPTER VI. Self-Examination--Dentistry--The Midnight Charm--Witches and
Devils--Cautious Approaches--Happy Hours

CHAPTER VII. A Treaty Entered Into--Early Lessons--A Mistake Made

CHAPTER VIII. Tom Decides on his Course--Old Scenes Re-enacted

CHAPTER IX. A Solemn Situation--Grave Subjects Introduced--Injun Joe
Explains

CHAPTER X. The Solemn Oath--Terror Brings Repentance--Mental Punishment

CHAPTER XI. Muff Potter Comes Himself--Tomís Conscience at Work

CHAPTER XII. Tom Shows his Generosity--Aunt Polly Weakens

CHAPTER XIII. The Young Pirates--Going to the Rendezvous--The Camp--Fire
Talk

CHAPTER XIV. Camp-Life--A Sensation--Tom Steals Away from Camp

CHAPTER XV. Tom Reconnoiters--Learns the Situation--Reports at Camp

CHAPTER XVI. A Dayís Amusements--Tom Reveals a Secret--The Pirates take a
Lesson--A Night Surprise--An Indian War

CHAPTER XVII. Memories of the Lost Heroes--The Point in Tomís Secret

CHAPTER XVIII. Tomís Feelings Investigated--Wonderful Dream--Becky
Thatcher Overshadowed--Tom Becomes Jealous--Black Revenge

CHAPTER XIX. Tom Tells the Truth

CHAPTER XX. Becky in a Dilemma--Tomís Nobility Asserts Itself

CHAPTER XXI. Youthful Eloquence--Compositions by the Young Ladies--A
Lengthy Vision--The Boyís Vengeance Satisfied

CHAPTER XXII. Tomís Confidence Betrayed--Expects Signal Punishment

CHAPTER XXIII. Old Muffís Friends--Muff Potter in Court--Muff Potter
Saved

CHAPTER XXIV. Tom as the Village Hero--Days of Splendor and Nights of
Horror--Pursuit of Injun Joe

CHAPTER XXV. About Kings and Diamonds--Search for the Treasure--Dead
People and Ghosts

CHAPTER XXVI. The Haunted House--Sleepy Ghosts--A Box of Gold--Bitter Luck

CHAPTER XXVII. Doubts to be Settled--The Young Detectives

CHAPTER XXVIII. An Attempt at No. Two--Huck Mounts Guard

CHAPTER XXIX. The Pic-nic--Huck on Injun Joeís Track--The ìRevengeî
 Job--Aid for the Widow

CHAPTER XXX. The Welchman Reports--Huck Under Fire--The Story Circulated
--A New Sensation--Hope Giving Way to Despair

CHAPTER XXXI. An Exploring Expedition--Trouble Commences--Lost in the
Cave--Total Darkness--Found but not Saved

CHAPTER XXXII. Tom tells the Story of their Escape--Tomís Enemy in Safe
Quarters

CHAPTER XXXIII. The Fate of Injun Joe--Huck and Tom Compare Notes
--An Expedition to the Cave--Protection Against Ghosts--ìAn Awful Snug
Placeî--A Reception at the Widow Douglasís

CHAPTER XXXIV. Springing a Secret--Mr. Jonesí Surprise a Failure

CHAPTER XXXV. A New Order of Things--Poor Huck--New Adventures Planned




ILLUSTRATIONS

Tom Sawyer

Tom at Home

Aunt Polly Beguiled

A Good Opportunity

Whoís Afraid

Late Home

Jim

ëTendiní to Business

Ainít that Work?

Cat and Toys

Amusement

Becky Thatcher

Paying Off

After the Battle

ìShowing Offî

Not Amiss

Mary

Tom Contemplating

Dampened Ardor

Youth

Boyhood

Using the ìBarlowî

The Church

Necessities

Tom as a Sunday-School Hero††††

The Prize

At Church

The Model Boy

The Church Choir

A Side Show

Result of Playing in Church

The Pinch-Bug

Sid

Dentistry

Huckleberry Finn

Mother Hopkins

Result of Tomís Truthfulness

Tom as an Artist

Interrupted Courtship

The Master

Vain Pleading

Tail Piece

The Grave in the Woods

Tom Meditates

Robin Hood and his Foe

Death of Robin Hood

Midnight

Tomís Mode of Egress

Tomís Effort at Prayer

Muff Potter Outwitted

The Graveyard

Forewarnings

Disturbing Muffís Sleep

Tomís Talk with his Aunt

Muff Potter

A Suspicious Incident

Injun Joeís two Victims

In the Coils

Peter

Aunt Polly seeks Information

A General Good Time

Demoralized

Joe Harper

On Board Their First Prize

The Pirates Ashore

Wild Life

The Pirateís Bath

The Pleasant Stroll

The Search for the Drowned

The Mysterious Writing

River View

What Tom Saw

Tom Swims the River

Taking Lessons

The Piratesí Egg Market

Tom Looking for Joeís Knife††††

The Thunder Storm

Terrible Slaughter

The Mourner

Tomís Proudest Moment

Amy Lawrence

Tom tries to Remember

The Hero

A Flirtation

Becky Retaliates

A Sudden Frost

Counter-irritation

Aunt Polly

Tom justified

The Discovery

Caught in the Act

Tom Astonishes the School

Literature

Tom Declaims

Examination Evening

On Exhibition

Prize Authors

The Masterís Dilemma

The School House

The Cadet

Happy for Two Days

Enjoying the Vacation

The Stolen Melons

The Judge

Visiting the Prisoner

Tom Swears

The Court Room

The Detective

Tom Dreams

The Treasure

The Private Conference

A King; Poor Fellow!

Business

The Haínted House

Injun Joe

The Greatest and Best

Hidden Treasures Unearthed

The Boyís Salvation

Room No. 2

The Next Dayís Conference

Treasures

Uncle Jake

Buck at Home

The Haunted Room

ìRun for Your Lifeî

McDougalís Cave

Inside the Cave

Huck on Duty

A Rousing Act

Tail Piece

The Welchman

Result of a Sneeze

Cornered

Alarming Discoveries

Tom and Becky stir up the Town

Tomís Marks

Huck Questions the Widow

Vampires

Wonders of the Cave

Attacked by Natives

Despair

The Wedding Cake

A New Terror

Daylight

ìTurn Outî to Receive Tom and Becky

The Escape from the Cave

Fate of the Ragged Man

The Treasures Found

Caught at Last

Drop after Drop

Having a Good Time

A Business Trip

ìGot it at Last!î

Tail Piece

Widow Douglas

Tom Backs his Statement

Tail Piece

Huck Transformed

Comfortable Once More

High up in Society

Contentment




PREFACE

Most of the adventures recorded in this book really occurred; one or two
were experiences of my own, the rest those of boys who were schoolmates
of mine. Huck Finn is drawn from life; Tom Sawyer also, but not from an
individual--he is a combination of the characteristics of three boys whom
I knew, and therefore belongs to the composite order of architecture.

The odd superstitions touched upon were all prevalent among children and
slaves in the West at the period of this story--that is to say, thirty or
forty years ago.

Although my book is intended mainly for the entertainment of boys and
girls, I hope it will not be shunned by men and women on that account,
for part of my plan has been to try to pleasantly remind adults of what
they once were themselves, and of how they felt and thought and talked,
and what queer enterprises they sometimes engaged in.

THE AUTHOR.

HARTFORD, 1876.




CHAPTER I

ìTOM!î

No answer.

ìTOM!î

No answer.

ìWhatís gone with that boy, †I wonder? You TOM!î

No answer.

The old lady pulled her spectacles down and looked over them about the
room; then she put them up and looked out under them. She seldom or
never looked _through_ them for so small a thing as a boy; they were
her state pair, the pride of her heart, and were built for ìstyle,î not
service--she could have seen through a pair of stove-lids just as well.
She looked perplexed for a moment, and then said, not fiercely, but
still loud enough for the furniture to hear:

ìWell, I lay if I get hold of you Iíll--î

She did not finish, for by this time she was bending down and punching
under the bed with the broom, and so she needed breath to punctuate the
punches with. She resurrected nothing but the cat.

ìI never did see the beat of that boy!î

She went to the open door and stood in it and looked out among the
tomato vines and ìjimpsonî weeds that constituted the garden. No Tom. So
she lifted up her voice at an angle calculated for distance and shouted:

ìY-o-u-u TOM!î

There was a slight noise behind her and she turned just in time to seize
a small boy by the slack of his roundabout and arrest his flight.

ìThere! I might ëaí thought of that closet. What you been doing in
there?î

ìNothing.î

ìNothing! Look at your hands. And look at your mouth. What _is_ that
truck?î

ìI donít know, aunt.î

ìWell, I know. Itís jam--thatís what it is. Forty times Iíve said if you
didnít let that jam alone Iíd skin you. Hand me that switch.î

The switch hovered in the air--the peril was desperate--

ìMy! Look behind you, aunt!î

The old lady whirled round, and snatched her skirts out of danger.
The lad fled on the instant, scrambled up the high board-fence, and
disappeared over it.

His aunt Polly stood surprised a moment, and then broke into a gentle
laugh.

ìHang the boy, canít I never learn anything? Ainít he played me tricks
enough like that for me to be looking out for him by this time? But old
fools is the biggest fools there is. Canít learn an old dog new tricks,
as the saying is. But my goodness, he never plays them alike, two days,
and how is a body to know whatís coming? He ëpears to know just how long
he can torment me before I get my dander up, and he knows if he can make
out to put me off for a minute or make me laugh, itís all down again and
I canít hit him a lick. I ainít doing my duty by that boy, and thatís
the Lordís truth, goodness knows. Spare the rod and spile the child,
as the Good Book says. Iím a laying up sin and suffering for us both,
I know. Heís full of the Old Scratch, but laws-a-me! heís my own
dead sisterís boy, poor thing, and I ainít got the heart to lash him,
somehow. Every time I let him off, my conscience does hurt me so, and
every time I hit him my old heart most breaks. Well-a-well, man that is
born of woman is of few days and full of trouble, as the Scripture
says, and I reckon itís so. Heíll play hookey this evening, * and [*
Southwestern for ìafternoonî] Iíll just be obleeged to make him work,
tomorrow, to punish him. Itís mighty hard to make him work Saturdays,
when all the boys is having holiday, but he hates work more than he
hates anything else, and Iíve _got_ to do some of my duty by him, or
Iíll be the ruination of the child.î

Tom did play hookey, and he had a very good time. He got back home
barely in season to help Jim, the small colored boy, saw next-dayís wood
and split the kindlings before supper--at least he was there in time
to tell his adventures to Jim while Jim did three-fourths of the work.
Tomís younger brother (or rather half-brother) Sid was already through
with his part of the work (picking up chips), for he was a quiet boy,
and had no adventurous, trouble-some ways.

While Tom was eating his supper, and stealing sugar as opportunity
offered, Aunt Polly asked him questions that were full of guile, and
very deep--for she wanted to trap him into damaging revealments. Like
many other simple-hearted souls, it was her pet vanity to believe she
was endowed with a talent for dark and mysterious diplomacy, and she
loved to contemplate her most transparent devices as marvels of low
cunning. Said she:

ìTom, it was middling warm in school, warnít it?î

ìYesím.î

ìPowerful warm, warnít it?î

ìYesím.î

ìDidnít you want to go in a-swimming, Tom?î

A bit of a scare shot through Tom--a touch of uncomfortable suspicion. He
searched Aunt Pollyís face, but it told him nothing. So he said:

ìNoím--well, not very much.î

The old lady reached out her hand and felt Tomís shirt, and said:

ìBut you ainít too warm now, though.î And it flattered her to reflect
that she had discovered that the shirt was dry without anybody knowing
that that was what she had in her mind. But in spite of her, Tom knew
where the wind lay, now. So he forestalled what might be the next move:

ìSome of us pumped on our heads--mineís damp yet. See?î

Aunt Polly was vexed to think she had overlooked that bit of
circumstantial evidence, and missed a trick. Then she had a new
inspiration:

ìTom, you didnít have to undo your shirt collar where I sewed it, to
pump on your head, did you? Unbutton your jacket!î

The trouble vanished out of Tomís face. He opened his jacket. His shirt
collar was securely sewed.

ìBother! Well, go ëlong with you. Iíd made sure youíd played hookey
and been a-swimming. But I forgive ye, Tom. I reckon youíre a kind of a
singed cat, as the saying is--betterín you look. _This_ time.î

She was half sorry her sagacity had miscarried, and half glad that Tom
had stumbled into obedient conduct for once.

But Sidney said:

ìWell, now, if I didnít think you sewed his collar with white thread,
but itís black.î

ìWhy, I did sew it with white! Tom!î

But Tom did not wait for the rest. As he went out at the door he said:

ìSiddy, Iíll lick you for that.î

In a safe place Tom examined two large needles which were thrust into
the lapels of his jacket, and had thread bound about them--one needle
carried white thread and the other black. He said:

ìSheíd never noticed if it hadnít been for Sid. Confound it! sometimes
she sews it with white, and sometimes she sews it with black. I wish to
gee-miny sheíd stick to one or tíother--I canít keep the run of ëem. But
I bet you Iíll lam Sid for that. Iíll learn him!î

He was not the Model Boy of the village. He knew the model boy very well
though--and loathed him.

Within two minutes, or even less, he had forgotten all his troubles. Not
because his troubles were one whit less heavy and bitter to him than a
manís are to a man, but because a new and powerful interest bore
them down and drove them out of his mind for the time--just as menís
misfortunes are forgotten in the excitement of new enterprises. This new
interest was a valued novelty in whistling, which he had just acquired
from a negro, and he was suffering to practise it un-disturbed. It
consisted in a peculiar bird-like turn, a sort of liquid warble,
produced by touching the tongue to the roof of the mouth at short
intervals in the midst of the music--the reader probably remembers how to
do it, if he has ever been a boy. Diligence and attention soon gave him
the knack of it, and he strode down the street with his mouth full of
harmony and his soul full of gratitude. He felt much as an astronomer
feels who has discovered a new planet--no doubt, as far as strong, deep,
unalloyed pleasure is concerned, the advantage was with the boy, not the
astronomer.

The summer evenings were long. It was not dark, yet. Presently Tom
checked his whistle. A stranger was before him--a boy a shade larger
than himself. A new-comer of any age or either sex was an im-pressive
curiosity in the poor little shabby village of St. Petersburg. This boy
was well dressed, too--well dressed on a week-day. This was simply as
astounding. His cap was a dainty thing, his close-buttoned blue cloth
roundabout was new and natty, and so were his pantaloons. He had shoes
on--and it was only Friday. He even wore a necktie, a bright bit of
ribbon. He had a citified air about him that ate into Tomís vitals. The
more Tom stared at the splendid marvel, the higher he turned up his nose
at his finery and the shabbier and shabbier his own outfit seemed to
him to grow. Neither boy spoke. If one moved, the other moved--but only
sidewise, in a circle; they kept face to face and eye to eye all the
time. Finally Tom said:

ìI can lick you!î

ìIíd like to see you try it.î

ìWell, I can do it.î

ìNo you canít, either.î

ìYes I can.î

ìNo you canít.î

ìI can.î

ìYou canít.î

ìCan!î

ìCanít!î

An uncomfortable pause. Then Tom said:

ìWhatís your name?î

ìëTisnít any of your business, maybe.î

ìWell I ëlow Iíll _make_ it my business.î

ìWell why donít you?î

ìIf you say much, I will.î

ìMuch--much--_much_. There now.î

ìOh, you think youíre mighty smart, _donít_ you? I could lick you with
one hand tied behind me, if I wanted to.î

ìWell why donít you _do_ it? You _say_ you can do it.î

ìWell I _will_, if you fool with me.î

ìOh yes--Iíve seen whole families in the same fix.î

ìSmarty! You think youíre _some_, now, _donít_ you? Oh, what a hat!î

ìYou can lump that hat if you donít like it. I dare you to knock it
off--and anybody thatíll take a dare will suck eggs.î

ìYouíre a liar!î

ìYouíre another.î

ìYouíre a fighting liar and dasnít take it up.î

ìAw--take a walk!î

ìSay--if you give me much more of your sass Iíll take and bounce a rock
offín your head.î

ìOh, of _course_ you will.î

ìWell I _will_.î

ìWell why donít you _do_ it then? What do you keep _saying_ you will
for? Why donít you _do_ it? Itís because youíre afraid.î

ìI _ainít_ afraid.î

ìYou are.î

ìI ainít.î

ìYou are.î

Another pause, and more eying and sidling around each other. Presently
they were shoulder to shoulder. Tom said:

ìGet away from here!î

ìGo away yourself!î

ìI wonít.î

ìI wonít either.î

So they stood, each with a foot placed at an angle as a brace, and both
shoving with might and main, and glowering at each other with hate. But
neither could get an advantage. After struggling till both were hot and
flushed, each relaxed his strain with watchful caution, and Tom said:

ìYouíre a coward and a pup. Iíll tell my big brother on you, and he can
thrash you with his little finger, and Iíll make him do it, too.î

ìWhat do I care for your big brother? Iíve got a brother thatís bigger
than he is--and whatís more, he can throw him over that fence, too.î
 [Both brothers were imaginary.]

ìThatís a lie.î

ì_Your_ saying so donít make it so.î

Tom drew a line in the dust with his big toe, and said:

ìI dare you to step over that, and Iíll lick you till you canít stand
up. Anybody thatíll take a dare will steal sheep.î

The new boy stepped over promptly, and said:

ìNow you said youíd do it, now letís see you do it.î

ìDonít you crowd me now; you better look out.î

ìWell, you _said_ youíd do it--why donít you do it?î

ìBy jingo! for two cents I _will_ do it.î

The new boy took two broad coppers out of his pocket and held them out
with derision. Tom struck them to the ground. In an instant both boys
were rolling and tumbling in the dirt, gripped together like cats; and
for the space of a minute they tugged and tore at each otherís hair and
clothes, punched and scratched each otherís nose, and covered themselves
with dust and glory. Presently the confusion took form, and through the
fog of battle Tom appeared, seated astride the new boy, and pounding him
with his fists. ìHoller ënuff!î said he.

The boy only struggled to free himself. He was crying--mainly from rage.

ìHoller ënuff!î--and the pounding went on.

At last the stranger got out a smothered ìëNuff!î and Tom let him up and
said:

ìNow thatíll learn you. Better look out who youíre fooling with next
time.î

The new boy went off brushing the dust from his clothes, sobbing,
snuffling, and occasionally looking back and shaking his head and
threatening what he would do to Tom the ìnext time he caught him out.î
 To which Tom responded with jeers, and started off in high feather, and
as soon as his back was turned the new boy snatched up a stone, threw it
and hit him between the shoulders and then turned tail and ran like
an antelope. Tom chased the traitor home, and thus found out where he
lived. He then held a position at the gate for some time, daring the
enemy to come outside, but the enemy only made faces at him through the
window and declined. At last the enemyís mother appeared, and called Tom
a bad, vicious, vulgar child, and ordered him away. So he went away; but
he said he ìëlowedî to ìlayî for that boy.

He got home pretty late that night, and when he climbed cautiously in
at the window, he uncovered an ambuscade, in the person of his aunt; and
when she saw the state his clothes were in her resolution to turn his
Saturday holiday into captivity at hard labor became adamantine in its
firmness.




CHAPTER II

SATURDAY morning was come, and all the summer world was bright and
fresh, and brimming with life. There was a song in every heart; and if
the heart was young the music issued at the lips. There was cheer in
every face and a spring in every step. The locust-trees were in bloom
and the fragrance of the blossoms filled the air. Cardiff Hill, beyond
the village and above it, was green with vegetation and it lay just far
enough away to seem a Delectable Land, dreamy, reposeful, and inviting.

Tom appeared on the sidewalk with a bucket of whitewash and a
long-handled brush. He surveyed the fence, and all gladness left him and
a deep melancholy settled down upon his spirit. Thirty yards of board
fence nine feet high. Life to him seemed hollow, and existence but a
burden. Sighing, he dipped his brush and passed it along the topmost
plank; repeated the operation; did it again; compared the insignificant
whitewashed streak with the far-reaching continent of unwhitewashed
fence, and sat down on a tree-box discouraged. Jim came skipping out at
the gate with a tin pail, and singing Buffalo Gals. Bringing water from
the town pump had always been hateful work in Tomís eyes, before, but
now it did not strike him so. He remembered that there was company at
the pump. White, mulatto, and negro boys and girls were always there
waiting their turns, resting, trading playthings, quarrelling, fighting,
skylarking. And he remembered that although the pump was only a hundred
and fifty yards off, Jim never got back with a bucket of water under an
hour--and even then somebody generally had to go after him. Tom said:

ìSay, Jim, Iíll fetch the water if youíll whitewash some.î

Jim shook his head and said:

ìCanít, Mars Tom. Ole missis, she tole me I got to go aní git dis water
aní not stop fooliní rouní wid anybody. She say she specí Mars Tom gwine
to ax me to whitewash, aní so she tole me go ëlong aní ëtend to my own
business--she ëlowed _sheíd_ ëtend to de whitewashiní.î

ìOh, never you mind what she said, Jim. Thatís the way she always talks.
Gimme the bucket--I wonít be gone only a a minute. _She_ wonít ever
know.î

ìOh, I dasnít, Mars Tom. Ole missis sheíd take aní tar de head offín me.
ëDeed she would.î

ì_She_! She never licks anybody--whacks ëem over the head with her
thimble--and who cares for that, Iíd like to know. She talks awful, but
talk donít hurt--anyways it donít if she donít cry. Jim, Iíll give you a
marvel. Iíll give you a white alley!î

Jim began to waver.

ìWhite alley, Jim! And itís a bully taw.î

ìMy! Datís a mighty gay marvel, I tell you! But Mars Tom Iís powerful
ëfraid ole missis--î

ìAnd besides, if you will Iíll show you my sore toe.î

Jim was only human--this attraction was too much for him. He put down
his pail, took the white alley, and bent over the toe with absorbing
interest while the bandage was being unwound. In another moment he
was flying down the street with his pail and a tingling rear, Tom was
whitewashing with vigor, and Aunt Polly was retiring from the field with
a slipper in her hand and triumph in her eye.

But Tomís energy did not last. He began to think of the fun he had
planned for this day, and his sorrows multiplied. Soon the free boys
would come tripping along on all sorts of delicious expeditions, and
they would make a world of fun of him for having to work--the very
thought of it burnt him like fire. He got out his worldly wealth and
examined it--bits of toys, marbles, and trash; enough to buy an exchange
of _work_, maybe, but not half enough to buy so much as half an hour
of pure freedom. So he returned his straitened means to his pocket, and
gave up the idea of trying to buy the boys. At this dark and hopeless
moment an inspiration burst upon him! Nothing less than a great,
magnificent inspiration.

He took up his brush and went tranquilly to work. Ben Rogers hove in
sight presently--the very boy, of all boys, whose ridicule he had been
dreading. Benís gait was the hop-skip-and-jump--proof enough that his
heart was light and his anticipations high. He was eating an apple, and
giving a long, melodious whoop, at intervals, followed by a deep-toned
ding-dong-dong, ding-dong-dong, for he was personating a steamboat. As
he drew near, he slackened speed, took the middle of the street, leaned
far over to starboard and rounded to ponderously and with laborious pomp
and circumstance--for he was personating the Big Missouri, and considered
himself to be drawing nine feet of water. He was boat and captain and
engine-bells combined, so he had to imagine himself standing on his own
hurricane-deck giving the orders and executing them:

ìStop her, sir! Ting-a-ling-ling!î The headway ran almost out, and he
drew up slowly toward the sidewalk.

ìShip up to back! Ting-a-ling-ling!î His arms straightened and stiffened
down his sides.